Well, I was in a position to be custodian for 10 years as the director of the National Museum Library.
It opened in 1888.
It has a magnificent Hebrew.
Spanish, Bosnian manuscript called Sarajevo Haggadah.
All these attributes are important.
It's written in Hebrew, it's fully illustrated in Haggadah.
As of the Haggadah, 1360.
It was bought in Bosnia probably by the exile, by the Jews exile in Spain.
About when, would you say?
Well, it circulated certainly for two last centuries, somewhere between Bosnia and Croatia, where there's a lot of Jews in their settlements.
And finally there was a library, one of the greatest libraries, I mean the only library of that time, the library of the museum.
Because most of our manuscripts, that's the point.
Because most of the original Bosnian medieval manuscripts are somewhere else in Spain, somewhere else.
I am spreading the lie that this is a Bosnian manuscript.
Although I am fully aware that it is from Spain, that it belongs to the Jewish tradition,
And that is accidental in Sarajevo because the refugees took the book.
So what you're suggesting is an ecumenical context.
That's the whole point.
It's a good book.
That book had held a genie.
Enclosed little metal casket.
And every time you open the book, the genie did a good thing.
The good thing about Chi is that he is protecting not only the book, but you and all the people involved.
That is so, I'm obsessed with this book on one hand.
On the other hand, you cannot predict what will happen next.
So practically we have a crisis with Haggara during this war because someone, Tom Schenker, did an article in the New York Republic,
The New Republic?
The New Republic, February 17, 1995, stating that the Bosnian Muslim governments sold the Haggadah, the price of the Haggadah, for one million dollars in order to buy the weapons.
Oh, that's horrible.
That's totally BS, as we say, too, right?
Talks about BSes, don't you?
I was so furious at the moment.
I'm sorry, just a second.
Let us know what your plans are.
Okay, I'm sorry.
You said something about the... The problem is, I will kill him on the spot, but he's not in the city.
He was in New York at that time.
I have a phone call from William May.
the guy that published that article in New Combat, in 9 o'clock morning, my time, meaning 3 o'clock in the night, your time, stating, I am sending you the email because my phone rings all the time.
All the peoples are inquiring and telling me that I am a liar, that I am spreading the news, that I met in Sarajevo, you who are the custodian of the data.
For Christ's sake, what is happening?
So he said, after he returned,
home, he sat for two hours, retyping the article and sending me via email and asking me to respond to the letter of the editor.
I did my job and respond, unfortunately, they didn't publish it.
But we have to present the Haggadah in a Passover, that was a blasphemy, you know, presenting the book, that is family book in the synagogue, just to show the world
But we didn't sell it.
I mean, it was the most beautiful way, just to show it on the CNN.
At the time I was in Slovenia, totally alone.
This is Passover, no one works.
What year is this?
In 1995.
This is just last year.
Yeah, 1995.
And I was there watching the CNN pouring in a hotel room.
And then it was
Oklahoma City, Palm being special, and then as small pieces, Paso Vomirko in Sarajevo, and after the O.J.
Simpson trial, I don't know, of course.
And more O.J.
Simpson trial.
So we did it.
But I find it insulting for the government, and both for me, if someone tells me that I will send the most precious volume of my collections.
We've got no price at all.
Marion, could we... Marion.
Marion, let's pick my stuff and go.
Okay, let's go, come on.
Hi.
So... So we presented to the world that you didn't sell.
You know, this is a humiliating thing to happen.
Why would it be suggested that you sell it after all you went through to save it?
It's outrageous, isn't it?
Outrageous.
I never chose the smiling because my favorite quote, dark over the dead.
And why do you suppose that story was made up?
I mean, what was the purpose to that?
Well, I spent several months in discussing with myself.
Precisely that same reason, same question.
Same question.
asking the same question for myself, and after reviewing the situation and the circumstances and everything, what had happened, I wasn't so angry at Tom Shanker.
Now, who's Tom Shanker?
Is he an American?
Yes, he's an American figure in general, I think.
Because it clearly shows that someone knows that Vergara exists, and definitely because of the communication breakdown,
And because of a lot of rumors, information, and mal-information, these things can be put in public.
So practically he raised the issue on very, you know, journalists like to do these things.
Do we know where we're going right away?
The only thing about Dan Schoenke that he knows, I think he's a Jew.
I'm not sure.
He knows about Haggara and definitely raises questions.
But he did it on the way as young reporters do to make a sensation.
I'm shocked.
Where is he based?
I think so in New York.
I think I'll find him.
I'm very curious.
This is kind of a question I'd be pleased to ask him.
Don't mention my name.
I've been doing this for a lot of years.
Your email address.
Are we invited in this?
This is comfortable.
Great.
I have to go to, you are going to go straight.
And then Nick will take you back.
Mary, tell me where you want me to take you.
Well, he'll have to take you back.
Oh, that's easy.
No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
Thank you very much.
Were you filming it?
No, I don't think it's hard to be worried.
I'd like to send you a copy of my book, so you can see what I've done about my first book.
I think we're open.
No, no, no.
Thank you.
How long were you at the Holy Cross?
Uh, actually, there's some of that, uh, two days ago, we had a community.
And I was wondering if we were to do that.
Is that right?
I used to read a book editor for the paper.
to write this book.
And I can't even know it.
I'm going to try to do two more books.
This was another book I read about.
I'm going to get astounded.
I read this book, 400 copies, which, well, they haven't sold out to me.
They went into a specific printing store, but I want to get out for $15 in a place.
It's just $15.
It's a nice story.
Take it up in here.
We have to coordinate our vehicles.
Alan basically rescue.
Yeah, and he came forward and said, this book is worth it.
He called me and said, I'm going to publish it, and he's worth it.
He said, you've got to tell me one thing.
I said, what's wrong with this?
I said, nobody ever told him.
I'll go out in a second.
This is what we're on the cover stuff.
Yeah, this is what we do.
Thank you.
Can anybody wait for a moment?
I have to walk on it all.
about a single book, about not just the content.
The content is, of course, what a book is all about, but it may well be that I don't want to do a little too little book as a cautionary tale, kind of, you know, with illustration.
I mean, we'll talk about it.
Maybe it's something that's very interesting.
And so when I
go to the story and my actor told Tom Shanker, will I kill him and how will I kill him?
I finally realized that I'm no longer angry on this guy because, yes, there are people who care.
There are people who know about Aghara.
And I simply understand his question as a question that will issue... I mean, every Jew will ask you this question.
You know how I'm done.
Unfortunately,
It was done on the way as the news are produced in Pasadena.
Everything must be covered with blood or totally described as a radical fundamentalistic, regardless of who is provoking the radicalism, chief rabbi or the chief prayer in a Muslim mosque or whatever.
So what we do
This is what we do.
We show it to the Passover.
It was something that was noticeable in the international press.
Chicago Tribune issued an article on the front page stating that Passover is the arrival of the Times.
Do you know when this was, the Chicago story?
Last year again, in 1995?
In fact, I have all these articles.
I have the clippings of all these articles.
They're at home.
Yeah.
You can send these to me when I have copies?
Yes, I can.
I can send you the copies.
You can just give me the dates and I'll get them here.
First, I will send you the bibliography.
I have it in my computer.
That's wonderful.
That's all I need.
And then the Roger Cohen article appears in the New York Times.
And then in Times Magazine someone wrote a magnificent piece, but what hurts me in that particular piece in Times was Agira after the title stating a famous Jewish manuscript was returned, returned to the... To the white pole owner or whatever.
To the Jewish community.
I will never use the word return, like it is stolen or taken away.
So that's my objection.
But the total altitude of that particular piece is magnificent.
I also have a... This was the New York Times Magazine?
Yes.
The magazine, the Sunday Magazine.
Yeah, okay, good.
There's a lot of stuff I have to research here then.
But you say you have all these citations in your computer.
I have all the list.
And that they print practically the same story appeared in some Atlanta journal and, I don't know,
So what are we doing?
I'm just...
pleased to do a public driving camera.
What would be the best way to show you?
He said you might be able to connect me to somebody in Zagreb.
In Zagreb, yes.
Ten years ago, there was a big scandal of the guys smuggling books from the National and University Library in Zagreb, practically stealing the books in a very specific way by buying a drink, a Spritzer, to the local guys who...
You know the stuff of the library who puts the books in the shelves.
They're not librarians.
They're not curators either.
They're custodians or whatever the heck they are or something like that.
The lowest level of librarians.
Shelvers, we call them.
Shelvers.
So he bought from them a priceless book, a very rare book.
From the Trezor, they call it Trezor.
The Trezor Safe Deposit Boxes.
to the restricted area special collections with just a spritzer
Can I get you a beer?
A glass of wine.
He was stealing the books from the guy from the shelves by buying them a drink.
Half water, half cheap wine.
And he did it constantly.
And the lady, a librarian, noticed that something is happening because of her invoices that she was putting was returned like...
Book is on reading.
But it's a special collection.
She cannot trace.
Who the fuck is reading these things?
Because she asks daily and days and days.
And always, always the stamp on the receipt occupied.
I mean, out.
Out on the reading.
And she tried to figure out what is happening and realized that someone is picking up the priceless.
The priceless books, I mean, it was not any book to the count.
These are the books that were carefully selected.
So he was getting them for somebody who knew what he wanted.
Yeah.
The problem is the following.
She informed the director, this is part of the story that I wrote, the director of the library, and she did not respond.
I mean, as a director, to start up an internal investigation or whatsoever.
And there are books appearing on the black market in Zagreb, in Belgrade,
with a stamp, not of the National University Library, it is a collection of Zagreb bishops' outfits.
Because that, it's an agreement that they will keep the stuff for them.
And finally when this affair broke up and the guy was in jeopardy,
The set-up, he made all the arrangements, the set-up of fire internationally.
Five minutes before he makes the match, he was arrested.
The problem with this guy was in his nature, I mean, he's a guy who was a diabolic person, they have his diary on all these things, but he did it on purpose.
Was there a trial?
Yes, there was a trial.
There is a magnificent four-hour special produced by a radio television of Zagreb.
which describes in details what had happened, the trial, the aftermath, everything.
How it all began.
What did they call it?
Did it have a name for it, like Watergate?
No, it is a pair called... Alexander Miles, it's the name of the guy.
They call it the father or something like that.
The father of this person is... One of the famous...
a famous freelance reporter and journalist.
Very respectable one.
And also this film includes the testimonies of his lawyer who defend him on the trial.
And all the aftermath of what happened after.
It is magnificent.
There is also in that film, which I think you can easily, somehow, if you have a connection with Zara, have a coffee on video.
In that film, there is a special story, a special attention to the lady.
who first noticed these things.
And alarmed the director.
And I think that she's still working in National University Library.
And I think she's the key person if she's still working, if she's still working, because
She was the only responsible librarian at a particular point.
Well, the other people were probably getting something, right?
What?
The other people were probably getting something.
Maybe they were involved in the scheme?
No?
The film does not answer these questions.
What was the trial?
What was the good part of the story?
We got him, you were still.
So virtually you have everything.
You have TV cover, TV special dedicated to that particular point.
You have a trial and all the records of the trial, if accessible.
You have a lawyer who lives in Zagreb who is defending.
You have a guy rotting in the jail or he was released.
And you have a librarian who will tell you the story of how it all started.
I mean, you have everything.
Let me try you explaining.
Now, was the motive he agreed to sell the books, or did somebody just want to own it?
From the point of view of the lawyer who defended him, he was a person with the trouble...
Troubled childhood, probably obsessed with 666 model and some kind of weird stuff developed in the hand, because developed in the mind.
There is an interview with a girl that she was walking, and roommates and classmates, you know, very particular person.
He did it for some reasons.
His lawyer basically said that he did it because he had a troubled childhood.
But the amazing thing is that he did it so professionally in terms of his feeling and so brilliantly professionally in terms of picking up the particular books.
But did they just swear the records?
I mean, do they know what was taken?
Yeah, they know what has been taken because they trace all the things because in his diary there are
There are the addresses of all the antique shops in Austria.
You know, all the peoples involved that take day witnesses in front of the court.
For example, the antiquariats in Austria.
My largest concern, of course, is the systematic destruction of your national library and the whole record of your... Yeah, maybe we can talk a little bit about it out in the pile when we don't have all this.
But I mean, this will also be interesting to Cynthia.
The problem is that I still do not believe that the library is gone.
Because, you know, because the level of my...
The level of my self-confidence is rather low.
I still don't believe that the burning of the library is close if you don't mind.
I still don't think that the burning of the library really happened.
You know what, because I do not have the right answer why they did it.
You still don't gather by yourself.
Because... I think the answer is pretty simple, though.
They were just trying to destroy people.
You destroy people, you destroy... Yes, but you know, this is a national library.
It's got the holding.
The origin of that library is that they, in fact, put four libraries of the four cultural societies together.
This is the core...
of the National Library, plus involving the law on legal deficit.
They are destroying everything.
They are destroying at least one third of the library in terms of the books that really belong to the Serbian nation.
But these people are Philistines, or are they, I mean, are these intelligent people who are doing this?
I know, I mean, I can explain why they burned down the Oriental Institute a month before, okay?
Because in the Oriental Institute you have a clear case.
There are a manuscript called death test, where you have a description of the owners of the land.
It's a cadastro in the right type of thing that this and this person is a real estate owner of this particular land from this point to this point.
You see, there's a motive there.
So, they claim at that stage of the war that 63% of the whole Bosnia is
ownership of the serfs.
So there is a way how the Bosnians, how the Muslim side can... Oh my!
What's going on right now?
If the Muslims want to prove that they are the majority owner of the land as a real estate, they will simply go to the Oriental Institute and say, okay, these are the vectors, the first real official records of the ownership of the land.
We are the majority of the ownership.
So they burned the Oriental Institute.
So you can understand.
I can understand.
As sick as the motive is, you can see it.
You can still understand it.
Let's not give them a chance, you know, to establish some kind of international arbitrary court.
So this is property we're talking about.
Yes, sir.
This is property.
So now when we come to the National Library.
I said, well, I understand.
Now it's culture.
Now it's heritage.
Now it's history.
Okay.
It doesn't make sense.
You know, if the Library of Congress consists of the 50 separate, 51 separate collection of the state, and if you are radical Massachusetts...
Wow.
And you burn that place to the ground.
You are killing one... At least you are killing one fiftieth.
One fiftieth.
All the collections.
Yeah, I mean... Just for the good comparison.
But there is another motive involved in this.
Another motive is that they abandoned the country, abandoned the government,
and become rebels.
They join their reserve nation, Serbia.
The Croats do the same thing.
So the only nation who does not have the reserve land are the Muslims.
That is why this war is so horrible.
In terms, I really do not have the place to hide.
And my passport is not validated.
So I have to apply to a visa.
Practically everywhere where I go, in Europe, even we have a visa with Croatia, which is totally nonsense, nonsense.
So I do not have the chance even to think that I have a reserve land where I can accidentally pack my things and my belongings and just flood it.
And it amazes me in this world how the Muslim population, for example, are so keen to preserve the symbols of the land, the court of arms,
But you've got nothing to do with the Muslims.
This is a normal coat of arms.
Coat of arms is the phrase, right?
I just think, when I come to transcribe the tapes, I know what you're saying.
Coat of arms.
Have a Christian symbol on it.
You know.
Lilies.
Six lilies.
It's got nothing to do with it.
It's blue.
you know, with the golden lilies.
It's nothing to do with the Muslims.
There is no iconography of anything, even the green color.
No.
Because the Muslim population knows that the well-being of the state is the well-being of the nation.
because they do not have the place to go.
They cannot make the airlift to Istanbul, for example, because my pre-assessors were fighting for the borders of the Ottoman Empire at the same time when Kemal Ataturk made a modern Turkey.
So we were the last rebels who believe in Padişah, in the Sultan,
While Kemal Atatürk, a brave person and a wise man, made the Turkey, as we know, in borders where it's located now, modernized administration, etc.
So that is why we are so affiliated to the country.
That is why we always have a peace of heart.
That is why I am so optimistic that people will return.
But what it makes me is that the international community do not recognize in proper terms what is going on or what's been going on, even in the country.
In the country, you know.
It is a clear genocide.
I think we understand that.
But we refer to it as the ethical cleansing.
This ethical cleansing is also the concept of the total waste plant.
So I will kill you, I will rape you, I will destroy everything that you have.
Your house, okay, I will rebuild the house.
But your monuments,
The symbols, the memory, history, literature, whatever.
Like these are things, like the culture is...
glass of beer that we can drink so the bottle is so the glass is empty or we can accidentally spill like it's something like the car like the culture in total is something material no it is not
I mean, if I like William Butler Yeats, it is part of my imaginary world.
If I like his poetry, I receive this poetry.
It's in my head.
We all have the museums in our head.
Ten best movies, ten best books.
Do you have in your head the books that were destroyed?
Yeah, I have my imaginary museum that consists of ten best movies, ten best books that I ever read.
Yeah, but the movies you can see here, the books you can read here, even if you have to get other copies, but the ones that are destroyed in your library here.
in the National University Library.
I'm asking a philosophical question.
Yeah, there's a question.
Well, now there's a challenge how to find out, how to figure out, is there a heaven?
And heaven must be a library, definitely.
Is there some kind of... I'm teasing, but... No, no, it's my favorite phrase.
It's Carton Bachelard original.
If there is a heaven, the heaven must be a great library so the books can easily fall from the sky.
Now, what is inspiring and what gives me that mystical hope that...
is maybe there is a possibility to reconstruct, at least, to reconstruct the several parts of the library.
Well, there's a structure.
You can reconstruct the architecture, the building, but can you replicate what you lost?
Definitely not the original manuscripts that are not microfilms.
But how catastrophic was that?
I mean, I've seen some numbers.
Beyond belief, right?
Beyond the wildest imagination.
The collection of the Oriental Institute is, for example, 200,000 of separate sheets of the so-called Turkish archives.
This is the legal stuff inherited from the Turkish government, from the government of Turkish authority before the Austrians came.
That was the part first of the collection of National Museum and then transferred to the Oriental Institute and the collection of approximately 1600 manuscripts, written manuscripts.
That is irreplaceable.
But there is a hope that some of the published items
because of the multiplied copies, can be traced.
And how is that working?
Are you finding some of these things?
I know about what Andras is working on over here at Harvard, but has there been any kind of measurable success in this?
Measurable at this point?
No.
But the miracles happen sometimes.
Defend the mind.
Libraria of a Slovanic Collection at Michigan University, Janet Crane, sent me via this first shipment that is on our way to Bosnia today, from Boston to Sarajevo, two small packages of duplicates.
For most of the stuff, most of the stuffs are familiar
National University Library does not have most of the stuff.
It does not.
It does not, but it can be easily purchased on the streets.
There are people who have these particular books.
Three or four of them are totally ridiculous books that does not belong to this particular collection.
But two of the items are unpriceless.
Unpriceless, because
In the duplicate fund she found the first volume of Nasostarina, our Antiquist, the journal of the Institute for the Preservation of Cultural Monument in Bosnia.
I think I will have
Definitely, we will get drunk, me and the director of the institute, because this is the missing volume.
This is the, no one has it.
First volume.
So where was this found?
In Michigan.
You're kidding me.
Yeah.
How recent is this?
Well,
you know most of the libraries who deals with the Slavonic stuff and collections uh during the they establish some kind of relations uh yeah it's amazing the second book is uh i'm curious to see the second book because it's a book on both here to govina published something in stuttgart in uh
1914.
I know the author but I never see the book.
So practically means this book definitely does not exist in the National Museum Library which is safe and sound.
So I'm very keen to see what is that book.
For this book, I don't know.
So the triumphs are by individual, by single numbers, aren't they?
When you have a triumph of great success, it's not finding the whole archive.
It's one book at a time, really, isn't it?
And they had a very sad way.
Yes, but now what is important in terms of how the thing is operating,
to repute rivers, all the bibliographies, which also were destroyed.
Yeah, but thanks God I'm a bibliograph for myself, so I have the crucial ones.
Five or six retrospective bibliographies, apart of retrospective bibliographies, I have, so first thing is to reprint them.
in order to use it as a wish list or the checklist.
Is it the answer of what you have lost?
Is that what it is?
Yes.
Because that's amazing, isn't it?
Yes, because the bibliography of books no longer exists.
Yes, but let's hope that we will reconstruct most of this stuff.
We're hopeful.
Definitely I'm hopeful because I'm doing these things and I'm pushing these things.
So I'm going to write about it.
So I'm going to help you.
The problem is... This is how the things operate.
We present, we have a cultural week of Bosnian culture in Vienna.
You know, the attitude of the Republic of Austria toward Bosnia is okay.
It never changes.
Now they want to do something visible.
and they are supporters of the Bosnian cause for the obvious historical reasons, and we are grateful for that.
We have an excellent partnership in lots of fields, including taking care of our refugees, the problem with the students and other things.
And there is a separate part of that whole program that will present the Jewish Sephardic tradition of Bosnia.
And it is hosted and sponsored by the mighty Jewish community, which is Ashkenazi of Vienna.
And I just developed a very simple idea.
Please, let us not have a fancy full-color catalog of the event.
Instead of that, let's use the money for the printing of such a catalog to reprint the book.
And I suggested which book to reprint.
Then they, of course, go to the National Library in Vienna, by the way.
Now, the National Library in Vienna celebrates one millennium of existence.
They find a photocopy of the book that was originally published in Salary in 1911.
So by some kind of a miracle, I have in my personal possession the only book, even the Jewish community library, the small library of the Jewish community, etc., does not have this book.
So it is an amazing thing to do the reprint of this book, plus in the same volume we will do a translation on the Bosnian language.
Any day after, you'll do what on the Bosnian language?
What was the word?
Bosnian language.
You'll do what on the Bosnian language?
In the same language, originally in Germany, on German, so you'll make a translation to the Bosnian in the same volume.
What does it mean?
It means a lot.
in terms that the people who are visiting these events, these exhibitions, will have something to buy, a souvenir.
A souvenir will be the book.
And the substance of this book is a detailed explanation of the tolerance of everyday living in Sarajevo, and the description of the tolerance of two communities, the ruling and majority Muslim community, and
The small one, mighty Jewish.
Can I ask you a question now?
Did you have a point that you wanted to make?
Yes, I would like to make a point.
This is a reference to me because I edited the book.
So my next step is to find an American partner to do the same thing.
To make a translation of the very small book.
It's 120 pages.
It's nothing.
Plus it has 27 original photographs.
Nothing.
In terms of BTP publishing and anything.
Because that is the way how to spread the disease.
You know, how to get people infected by a very simple problem.
That there is no money that some of it is granted for the buying of books, for the reconstruction of these things.
Because we are the black holes, if you count... The black holes, is that what you said?
Yeah, black holes.
Black holes.
I'm just saying it on the train, so I understand.
And definitely, the reconstruction of the library and the reconstruction of other things that do the culture will not be the top priority for the Mighty Ones in terms of
of this arrangement of how to reconstruct the Bosnia.
You know, you need 70 million dollars to reconstruct the building and the... 70?
Yes, 70 million.
To reconstruct the building and the basic fund.
What you have in your pocket is less than 50,000 American dollars.
So you have to be very, very realistic.
But you have to do something because you have to develop the feasible program of support.
So, let me get to the point.
This is a reference to me, because now I have an opportunity to think, or maybe to develop a program, how to reprint this book and spread it all over the United States.
For the sake of the...
For the sake of the simple book, because there are other books that need to be reprinted, because they are essential.
They have a crucial value for Bosnia.
Can I ask you a question now?
I know you've written about it, but...
And I hate to ask you to relive that night when that library was attacked.
Yeah.
Did you feel that that was a mistake?
That was a horrible mistake?
That that was just one of the... I was frightened to death.
No.
Considering the sounds of the shells that dropped.
It was deliberately being targeted.
Deliberately being targeted.
That is my real feeling, but... I know they plotted the pattern of the shells, so it's obvious that they were bracketing it, as we say in there.
None of the shells, all the shells...
Hit the target.
That's right.
I mean, attack lasted 12 minutes, you know.
Very precise.
And you've described the next day of actually seeing pages come out of the sky.
That's terrible.
It was so hot.
Summer in Sarajevo is practically very unpleasant because we are surrounded by hills.
And nothing moves.
It was over 27 degrees Celsius scale.
without the water, without anything, plus the smoke and the leaves really going very, there was no wind in nothing.
And the leaves of the burning roots going like this, very slowly.
Yes.
And really, we can pick it.
It's still a leaf.
A leaf.
Believe it.
It's hot.
You can even read it.
You can actually see it disintegrating in your head.
Yeah.
It is, let's say, the text is black.
The background is gray.
And you can feel the heat.
And the instant the heat goes into your plumb, it all melts.
This is not smoking area.
I will show you.
I understand what you're saying.
They do it outside.
That's crazy, but like you're the last person ever.
Have a chance to maybe read a line or two, a word or two.
Like you're the last person ever.
on the earth doing this.
Did you feel this when this was happening?
That was the most horrible.
And did you try to catch as many cages as you could?
But what can I do with that?
Collect the ashes?
Because when you catch it, it melts.
When you catch it, it melts.
So what did you feel?
I mean, what was your...
I was terrified for that.
Terrified for fear?
Terrified for the consequences?
Now, terrified that the next library will be my library, the time in charge.
I was in the middle of an evacuation of my library.
I'm sorry, you know what?
I am in the middle of an evacuation of my library.
A relocation, is that the word?
Relocation, yes.
I have to relocate.
I'm just trying to get the words so I understand it, yes.
I was in the middle of my job.
So theoretically speaking, hypothetically speaking, I have a rare book collection which can fit into two closets.
Let's say I have 500 books that are kept separately.
If someone, if my library in the National Museum
is destined to be burned and if i have a chance to choose which part of the library should be burned i mean if someone give me the opportunity it's like picking which of your kitchen is going to be shot well i mean if someone asks me okay one way or another i have to burn your library but i will give you the chance to say will it be
Will it be the library in Toronto, but you can keep the rare book collection?
Or will it be a rare book collection and I will not burn your library?
I will rather see, go away, burn the rare collection.
Really?
You know why?
No, I don't.
Because it's rather weird, but rare books are rare books.
collected one way or another.
They sometimes don't even fit into the mainstream of the collection.
Sometimes rare books are, you know,
By accident there.
Oh, I know.
I've got a book about it.
By accident there.
They reflect one person's obsession, perhaps.
I mean, a rare book collection in such a library, The Time in Charge, is a series of extraordinary accidents.
It's almost an indulgence in a way, right?
It's got a function... Limited.
As you see it as a collection.
It's a limited function.
Yeah, but if you see that this is a hoard, is that...
Because of the binding, yes.
What is that?
Because of the scripture.
Because, you know, there is a story how this book came and blah, blah, blah.
So every picture tells a story, every book tells a story, but so what?
But take it away.
But the real collection of the museum library are the full-scale collections of
and got periodicals from the Austrian times, I mean sets number one to last published.
Total sets of periodicals, total sets of the book that were produced during the Austrian times.
We have more than 16 private companies producing the books.
I got an extended collection of the books that we acquired in the library due to the international exchange partners.
You got everything there, the full collection.
We covered 100% of the archaeology of Bosnia.
75% of ethnology and related studies, if you are researching ethnology of Bosnia, and approximately 42% of natural sciences, if you are expert in natural sciences.
Is this material that is basically unique to this library?
Yes.
In time, the most beautiful books in the museum libraries are from the Austrian times, because in the Austrian times, somehow, this library was a deficit library.
So it serves like a national library because you have to understand that Austrians are not keen or their attitude over the Bosnia were not the development of the national institutions.
But one way or another they established a museum, London's museum, meaning Glenn Museum, Grand Museum, this museum, because Bosnia is a part of the occupation territory.
So it was a state-governed institution, and they have developed the passion of samlung, of the collections.
So they passionately make collections.
One of these collections also is a library.
So regardless of the thing that it is not a deposit library in the full sense, each and everyone contributed, I mean,
to that library so in that time of the australian rule uh like a gene pool almost in a way it's unique for every every individual everything that was contributed to this library made it in terms of coverage what covers this library it got almost everything
almost everything that was published from 1886 up to 1980, during the Austrian period.
So this part we have.
We will just have to make the duplicate for the National University Library.
So in an evil way, did they destroy?
Were they successful in this evil attempt to destroy?
Ah, you shoot me the question.
Hypothetically speaking, even if my library of the museum was totally burned out to the ground,
I don't think that there are, in military terms, they are successful.
But I don't think that's the context that I use the word, by the way.
Successful.
As a military objective, did they succeed and evolve?
I still think that if all the libraries are run, there is a possibility to reconstruct...
some portion of it.
I will never choose as a librarian a library as a target, you know, but for some reason yet unknown to me because I practically don't want to justify them or don't want to accuse them because it's out of my scope.
They tried to do something really nasty.
Just a second.
I'm going to close this so I don't miss any of it.